Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Donnelly Walheim is one of the versatile talents that science fiction occasionally produces.
He's an author, editor, critic, and publisher of science fiction.
And his influence on the field has been immense.
He became involved in science fiction back in the early 30s, and many of the things he did had not been done before.
He and Forrest Ackerman can be given much of the credit for starting fandom in the 1930s, for instance.
And as an editor, he's been an innovator and creator many times over.
In 1972, Walheim founded DAW Books, the first mass-market publishing house devoted entirely to science fiction.
The word DAW, of course, comes from the initials of Donald A. Walheim's name.
When we spoke with Walheim, we asked him if he would tell us about the beginning of DAW Books.
Well, you know, I had been with A. Spokes for 19 and a half years.
In fact, I was responsible for the founding of the company, though I didn't own it.
And after the death of A. A. Wynn, who was his original publisher and owner,
it passed into the hands of a group of Wall Street speculators who wanted to build up some kind of a conglomerate in the communications industry.
Unfortunately, they made a number of bad mistakes, and in about three years, the company was run downhill to where they were in rather bad financial straits.
And it was at that point, when it looked as if we were likely to have our doors closed at any minute or any day,
that I got together and we talked, you know, I was thinking of the chance to do it, to get out and stop my own line.
And the man who was the printer for A. Spokes came to me and said, you know, this is getting ridiculous.
They owed him months and months of payment.
He said, why don't we break loose and start our own company?
Well, actually, that's put the idea in my head.
But I didn't go into partnership with him.
What I did is scout around and we were able to successfully leave A. and launch our own company under our name DAW Books,
which is based on my initials.
Walheim actually neither prints or markets his books.
We made a very fine arrangement with the New American Library that publishes a signet book for distribution and for co-partnership,
which means that in a sense I feed into their operations.
I am my own editor, my own publisher.
I'm an independent corporation, but they do our printing.
They do our marketing and distribution and handle the minor details.
And of course we pay them for this, but it's been a very profitable partnership between us.
Walheim's wife, Elsie, helps him run DAW Books, so it's sort of a family affair.
The odd thing about that was that originally my secretary from A. Spokes was going to come over with me.
But she was a, she got a little panicky and was afraid to leave her, the staffer's job for one which was insecure.
And she didn't come.
Instead, my wife, who had many years ago before she married me,
been president of her own small corporation in the manufacturing jewelry industry,
knew the odds and ends of bookkeeping and management of her business, instead, you know, came with me.
So she's working as my executive vice president.
It's worked out marvelously.
We're a husband and wife team that is really becoming one of the wonders of the industry.
We asked Walheim how many books he puts out each year.
We have other publishers that are now available again, or anthologies, or some of our annuals.
We do several annuals, the year's best horror, year's best fantasy,
and my own annual World's Best Science Fiction collection.
That's always been one of our mainstays.
More with Donal A. Walheim next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
We're talking with Donal A. Walheim, Science Fiction author, editor, and presently the publisher of Daw's Science Fiction books.
Daw's books is the only mass publisher devoted entirely to science fiction, and the company puts out some 60 titles each year.
We asked Walheim how I select the books he'll publish.
Is there a certain kind of story he looks for?
Well, actually we try to be as varied as possible, but I go on, the premise in which I've always operated as an editor,
if I like it I publish it.
This is something which I sort of developed over the years, I've been almost 40 years as an editor,
and I discovered that by good luck or bad luck or whatever you have it,
I seem to be, what I like seems to be like what I write, at least 75% of the potential readers.
So maybe I have good taste, maybe I have bad taste, I don't honestly know,
but all I know is that what I like, I will find that my readers will generally like.
So in science fiction, I like some good hardcore science fiction.
I also like Good Adventure, the Edgar Rice borrows type.
We do a series like that by Dray Prescott.
And I like fantasy if it's nicely done, and I'm really quite, quite wide open in my taste.
Walheim is noted as an editor and publisher who can spot new talent.
In his over 40 years as an editor, he's been responsible for introducing many of today's big name writers to the field.
Two of his fortunate finds at Daw Books have been CJ Sherry and Tanneth Lee,
both of whom published their first novels for Walheim.
We asked him how he locates writers of that caliber.
Do they seek him out, or does he go looking for them?
Both ways actually. We have an established image, people know what Daw Books are like,
they know what they can expect from them.
A lot of people who are faithful readers because they feel that almost every book that they buy,
we got to know who writes it is going to be something they like because that tastes obviously similar to mine.
We pride ourselves of being one of the very, very few companies that actually looks at and reads
every unsolicited manuscript that comes in.
We don't read it all the way through, but we look at it.
Nothing goes through here without being inspected and read if it's possible.
Now that's how we find new authors.
We found CJ Sherry there, we found Tanneth Lee that way,
we found well many other authors, Michael Foster and Doris Berserky and so on, Joe Clayton.
They are people we found, but they submitted to us in the first place because they thought we were the kind of authors
that was doing the kind of book they were writing.
If we both agree, they're great.
We asked Walheim if he ever suggests changes in an author's manuscript before he'll publish it.
In a few instances we will suggest changes, but I don't really like that system.
I pride myself in the fact that the people who become more or less regular contributors
have gotten to know what I like and what I like is usually what they like.
So we have a situation where I don't have to tell many authors to rewrite or anything like that.
It's a project of course we'll discuss the possible terms of it before the thing is even written.
There's a complete manuscript and I've read it and I like it.
Great. I do very little actually in that sense of making an author revise and revise.
What about suggesting to an author that he write a sequel or expand a novel into a trilogy?
I usually do not. This is something that authors themselves come up with.
Authors dream up trilogies and they'll submit a first novel so they're two more sequels.
If I agree with it, I don't mind.
We'll continue our conversation with Donnelly Walheim on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Have you ever wondered what goes into the making of the Science Fiction paperback you just bought?
You know that somebody wrote it and that some business enterprise printed it,
but you probably don't think much beyond those general facts.
It takes eight months usually for the typical paperback to complete the publishing cycle
and a lot happens in that time.
When we spoke with Donnelly Walheim, a pioneer fan, author and editor of Science Fiction,
and now the publisher of Dahl Science Fiction books,
we asked him if he would trace the publishing process through for us,
beginning at the moment he receives a manuscript.
Well, of course.
As I said, I have a schedule of eight months ahead.
Now, at the point that I like the manuscript, what I do is that
is contact the author or the author's agent who ever submitted it and discuss contract
and then we'll make up the contract which we sent to the author to be signed.
We'll pay out the initial advance on that.
And that will take about anywhere from three weeks to a month.
And we put it in our inventory.
The next step is selecting an artist for the cover.
Walheim has an interesting method for that.
If the book is on schedule, within about, well, let's say,
within about two months or three months,
I will take the manuscript and he have it copied, have it Xeroxed,
and give a copy to an artist that I think would do the cover, the right cover for it.
A number of different cover artists and some do better at certain types of stories than others.
I prefer my artists to read the manuscript.
If I want them to be actually science fiction readers to enjoy the subject,
and they usually do.
So if they get a cover, they get a manuscript,
they will then have approximately one month to turn in the finished cover.
What they will do is read it and then they will sketch out some possible covers,
bring in the sketches.
We will okay one of them or suggest changes.
And they will have another couple of weeks to turn in the complete painting,
which would be available at the end of that month.
At that same time, we would then have to do and put together the copy for the cover,
the material in the back cover, the titles and all that.
We shall have to make out to a way, to an agency that does the layouts and picks type and all that.
Then comes the important job of reading the manuscript to locate and correct errors.
Meanwhile, we then have a month in which the book must be copy edited.
That goes to an editor who goes over the manuscript making corrections,
correcting spelling, correcting punctuation, making any minor changes that might be necessary.
And I say minor because any major changes would be done by the author, never by the copy editor.
So a month later, that manuscript would then go out to the production.
Production as a man, this would go through the New American Library, you understand.
But there's a man there who was an old friend of mine who worked for me,
he's an ace in his working part at the New American Library now.
He will design the book, he will determine the size type, the layout of the title page, the layout of pages,
and we'll send it off to the printers.
And we will next see in about, anywhere from two to five weeks,
the galleys and proofs for the front.
And by that time, it will be out a month ago.
And the next thing we saw after that would be the book itself.
This stretches out, so it's about five months involved in the actual production.
But it's a leisurely pace, it stretches out, it works in very mechanically, and it just runs along.
The paperback finally shows up in a bookstore or supermarket, of course,
and in the case of dog books, it will be noticeable.
That's because all dog books have bright yellow spines, so they'll stand out in the science fiction section of the bookstore.
And a lot of intricate professional work lies behind that spine.
We'll talk again with Don Delay-Walheim on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
The next episode will be about the science fiction radio show.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Since its inception in 1972, dog books has published some of the best science fiction being written today.
For the founder of dog books, Don Delay-Walheim, it's been a satisfying and successful venture.
So successful, in fact, that some people have wondered why dog books doesn't try hardback books in addition to the paperbacks it exclusively publishes.
Walheim tells us why not.
There's a couple of reasons for that.
For one thing, I don't know the hardback field.
I have, well, I've been an editor of pulp magazines and of paperback books,
new stand-distributed books, since 1941.
New York Times called me the dean of paperback editors.
But to be frank, I have never been an editor of hardcover books.
It's a somewhat different field.
The marketing situation is different.
The pricing situation is different.
I would be sort of an amateur.
And I don't believe in sticking my neck out into a field in which I really don't know what I'm doing.
Now, I could, of course, make an arrangement with a hardcover publisher.
But I don't see it.
I don't believe in that a hardcover books sell that well.
You print a week-well, after all, in paperbacks, you print by the tens of thousands of copies.
In hardcover, you print one.
Three thousand copies, five thousand, perhaps seven thousand.
So hardcover editor comes in and says,
gee, we've got a great item.
It sells four thousand copies.
Well, that's a joke to me.
All right, there's money in it.
But I don't need the headache.
I don't want it.
I don't see it.
Other companies apparently do these things successfully.
But that's because they're probably connected up with a hardcover publisher,
people who know their business.
I certainly don't feel that I wish to get involved.
We asked Walheim how many copies of paperback science fiction books would have to sell before it generated a reasonable profit.
That is very difficult to answer because it would depend on the size of the book and the price of the book.
But very roughly, the average non-bestseller, say, book in the science fiction fantasy category,
may do well at thirty thousand copies.
In other words, by that point, it will have cleared its course and made a small profit.
Obviously, if it makes fifty thousand, not sixty thousand, seventy five, or a hundred thousand, it's great.
But the margin is quite low, surprisingly enough.
And so it is not as risky as you may think.
Finally, something of concern to all readers.
What about the escalating prices of paperbacks?
How long before high prices make a real difference and begin to hurt readers?
I think it does make a difference.
It hasn't affected science fiction, I think, because we have a very ardent audience.
And in general, paperbacks are holding up much better than most of the book industry.
But it does make a difference.
The question of how far prices can go up is something I couldn't answer you,
because this is, you know, economic speculation.
Who in the heck knows?
I mean, nobody can guess what the economy is.
We all hope that the inflation will stop, and maybe it will.
But if it doesn't, why, prices have to go up accordingly,
because of the cost of paper, the cost of printers, the cost of binding,
the cost of distribution, the cost of marketing.
Everything goes up.
And you've got to raise your price accordingly, or it's impossible to do business.
We do try very hard to be conservative about pricing.
We try to hold it back.
We have discussions pretty regularly.
I will sometimes suggest that a book should be, let us say, 250,
and we'll have the head of marketing will come in and say,
can't you make it 225, because you'd like to hold this down.
And if it's practical, we will.
If it's not practical, I can't.
But the truth is that nobody wants to raise these prices,
but we, you know, we get pressed, like anybody in any industry.
We'll conclude our discussion with Donnelly Walheim on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Daw Books published some of today's most popular authors.
We asked Donnelly Walheim, founder and editor of Daw Books,
whose best-selling authors are?
Well, our bestsellers are the John Norman Gore books,
Andre Norton's novels, CJ Cherry does very nicely,
Tammeth Lee goes back to press pretty continuously,
and, uh, well, we have quite a number that do very nicely.
Marion Zimmer Bradley, for instance, is always short,
he kept continuously in print.
We do Mike Moorcock books, and they're continuously in print.
We do, well, well, many titles of that sort.
So, uh, our bestseller is John Norman, of course.
He sells by half a million at a book, and constantly in print.
In addition to books by individual authors,
Daw Books also publishes many anthologies each year.
The best known is Daw's annual, The World's Best Science Fiction,
published each year since Daw Books' inception in 1972.
We asked Walheim if he selected the stories in his anthologies himself.
Yes, it's a tough chore, and I work with Arthur Saha,
who is an old-time science fiction fan,
and a determined reader of everything that comes out.
And so Saha does the first reading and sorts out the junk from the good ones,
and gives me a list of what he thinks I should read.
Well, that saves me an awful lot of work,
and I sort through his recommended list,
and finally we arrive at what we consider to be the ten best,
and that creates our annual.
Does he have any criteria he goes by?
Yeah, if I like the story.
Uh, basically, of course, it also is the originality of concept,
and originality of plot, and of course, how well it's written.
All these factors come into play.
Well, generally speaking, if we had a really original idea,
I would be strongly in favor of it.
Unfortunately, science fiction being what it is,
it's not too easy to come up with original ideas these days.
We asked Walheim to tell us about some of the other anthologies Dogbooks puts out,
and we also asked if his anthologies sold well.
Uh, for us, they sell quite well.
Uh, we have no problems with the annual.
Uh, we reissue it, usually four years later,
as Walheim's world's best series, five or four or six.
Because you can't have a dated book.
A dated book, it's prejudice is your dealer's.
So our 1982 annual, which is coming out in a couple of months,
Cross-Cubb is the best in 1981.
Uh, other books, like the year's best horror stories,
we are being edited for us by Carl Edward Wagner,
who himself is a good name and a good writer in that field.
Uh, year's best fantasy used to be edited for us by Limbe Carter,
but now is being handled by Ross of Zaha directly.
And, uh, Isaac Asimov is doing an encyclopedic study of the early days,
beginning with 1939 and working up to the present,
about two books a year.
Well, Asimov presents the great SF stories.
And, uh, I did one, one, one, uh, volume of Terra SF,
which was the best stories from Eastern, from Western Europe,
which is edited for me by a French science fiction fan
that's familiar with the field and the mainstream range
to get translations from all over, uh, Western Europe.
Uh, I will probably continue that on, on a once every two years basis.
So, uh, it works.
Walheim has had a career in science fiction that's lasted over 50 years.
In all aspects of science fiction, he's one of the pioneers of the field.
He's been a fan, an author, a critic, an editor, and now with dog books, a publisher.
As with few others, he's devoted his life to science fiction
and left an indelible mark on the field.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.